built in Russia, where it became the Moskvitch, which was rubbish.
And, of course, indirectly, the Vauxhall Astra.
Quite a lot of reasonably average cars owe themselves to this.
I don't know if you know, but Africa is really quite large, and when you're out in a very remote part, you need a car like this, that can be mended with a brick and a piece of string.
What you have to remember is that three of the most rugged and successful rally cars ever made were Lancia's.
The Stratos, the 037 and the Delta Integrale.
Lancia know how to make a rally car.
Unfortunately, on the day my beauté coupé was made, they obviously forgot everything.
The gearbox is broken, the steering's broken, the window's broken.
In fact, we all had problems.
Everything works except this knob, which controls the blood.
I've got to have the windows open because there's quite a strong smell of petrol.
And that mirror over there, which is actually slightly stuck.
Hazard warning lights, the clock, the fan, the handbrake, all of the dials.
The brakes are terrible because they only work on that wheel.
They work very well on that wheel, but only on that wheel.
And that instrument's a bit wobbly.
Apart from that, everything that's actually important to the car works perfectly.
Apart from the handbrake, which I can pull like this as we go along.
Nevertheless, because we were on tarmac roads, we decided to give our cars a shakedown.
Building up speed now.
When it was made, this car had 116 horsepower.
Top speed, 115 miles an hour.
Here we go.
Going 100 kilometres an hour more.
Right, I'm going to overtake the truck.
Here I go.
He's pulled out of its slipstream.
Well, it's really coming up.
105.
Still truck.
105.
Still truck.
105.
3,000 revs, 3,500.
Pulls cleanly.
Hang on a minute.
It's got no fifth gear.
Somebody's put the knob from a five-gear model on it.
This is just the happiest car in the world.
As we call it, Oliver.
Not that we'd ever name a car on top of it.
I wish I hadn't said that.
It's now five past ten in the morning and it's starting to get quite hot.
I've got an idea.
Oh, yeah.
That's better.
Don't know what that is.
The horn!
Oliver, you've got a cold!
Listen!
We were having fun, but then we discovered we were travelling with Bill Oddie.
Why have you got a pen?
You tick them off when you've seen them.
Hornbill, southern yellowbill.
Take a look at your car.
It's massive!
Don't knock Oliver.
Don't knock my car.
That's a fine... He's a fine... What did you call it, then?
Oliver's a friend of mine and I thought you were talking about him.
He's given it a name.
He's given his car a name.
So far, the journey had been a doddle.
Then the tarmac just sort of stopped.
Oh, this is bad.
I can see from here just how hard the suspension on Jeremy's Lance is having to work.
It's just a blur.
Come on, Oliver, please!
The later you book a lift in the Mercedes, the more expensive it gets.
It's a bit like an airline.
Oh, God!
Oh!
Engine isn't working, it's cut out.
Oh, dear.
He's done literally one kilometre of this.
I know what's wrong with it.
The bonnet won't open.
Yeah, it's the bonnet catch.
Shut up!
Hammond was tetchy because he knew the price of failure.
Anyone whose car broke down would have to complete the journey in a beetle.
It is collectively our least favourite car in the world.
Oh, yes.
It is the punishment.
Please!
Oh, hang on, hang on.
Oh!
Come on, Oliver!
What did you say?
I said, I love you!
Oh, my God.
What now?
My car's on fire, but in a very specific place.
Wow, look at that.
It's a magnifying glass.
There's a laser beam coming through it.
Oh, his piece of cardboard's gone.
So it sets itself on fire?
If you don't have a piece of cardboard.
