Oh, yeah, that's a whopper.
That's a whole lion there.
Oh, yeah, under the seat.
Oh, the smell will really... That'll be beautiful.
We also attached a cowbell to the underside of his car.
But while we were doing this, he was making merry with the paint.
That afternoon, we left Man and headed north to the Okavango Delta.
Right, my car now has been readied.
As you can see, I have a wooden door here.
It's a gull-wing, so I can get in and out, obviously.
God, this is like being in an allotment shed... on a very windy day.
On the left, I have all the cans that were in the car for the last few days have been arranged, and Fiesta Resistance.
Badgers, go away.
Mad Jeremy.
Police car.
Can anybody else smell burning or is it my car?
Is it like a barbecue smell?
As we neared the Okavango, the roads became rougher and rougher.
This is where the Big Ben comes into its own, really, because it's got good ground clearance, nothing... Bloody hell.
This is enough to shake the skulls from your bonnet, and nobody in the whole of human history has ever said that before.
So, just to summarise, viewers... As we went through the gates and into the game reserve, the road changed again, for the worse.
This is new.
Very soft sand.
To stop our cars bogging down, we had to drive as fast as possible.
We had ourselves another rally stage.
Amazingly, even Jeremy had his work cut out keeping up with the Opel.
Hammond's car just looks so composed.
I'm developing this irrational hatred of him and it.
This is such a good game.
Eventually, he was slowed down by a bridge over the river Kwai.
The rally stage had taken its toll on one of the cars.
Take a guess which one.
I'm in a car, which is even probably here, has got a throttle that's jammed wide open and I can't hold it on the brakes.
Hammond, move!
You're going to have to go faster than I hit you.
What?
Oh, God!
Thanks!
Well, help yourself to my brakes, why not?
I've lost a skull.
Monkeys.
I'm sorry, I can't... I just hit the throttle.
That's tick over.
Look, my leg's not on it.
Having blotched my throttle, we headed deeper into the Okavango.
Front, 12 o'clock.
One o'clock.
This is where wildlife cameramen come to make a name for themselves with David Attenborough.
But unfortunately, our film crew are best, really, with cars.
A giraffe on the right.
There.
The big thing.
Little fluffy clouds.
We have a programme called The Back End of an Animal.
Meet the boys to hire.
This week on Too Late to Look.
A moon on the left with animals with a baby on its back.
To give our crew a chance, we stopped and discovered that we weren't much good at animals either.
Wow, look!
Look!
A hippo's head.
Oh, it is!
Well, it's probably a whole hippo.
It's just the rest of him is under the water.
What does a hippo do just before it's about to attack?
Opens its mouth.
Opens its mouth.
It can open its jaw.
There's a thing it can do.
Oh, look!
Oh, look at that!
They stop for a drink.
using their noses to shovel water into their mouths.
Jeremy, that's a rubbish commentary.
James took over.
That one's lifting its paw up a bit like a dog does.
Paw.
Hoof.
Foot.
Whatever you call it.
Hoof.
Why is it on an elephant?
It's amazing.
There's a man over there with the best comb-over I have ever seen in my life.
That is...
He's got four partings as a result of that.
Let's see.
Why don't... You're bald.
Live with it.
Oops, he called me back.
I was looking through...
