Is this a good time to acknowledge that mine is the only one that has worked consistently?
No.
This is worrying.
I need to be home by Saturday.
I've been invited to a beetle drive.
The entire crew was working on the stricken beater until we were rewarded with the most glorious sound in the world.
Life.
It lives!
It lives!
I got a whole hundred yards.
I'm not stuck.
The idle speed's not good.
Bye, everybody.
I can't stop.
Please.
Please.
Soon, we hit the tarmac and we started to taste the hope.
Just 20 miles.
You can do that.
You've crossed Botswana.
Now, I'm stuck in second, but second will do.
Obviously, mine would keep going to the other side of the whole continent, but, you know... Come on, ten miles, please!
Then something really surprising happened.
Oh, no, not now.
Please!
Because the Lancia had been such a problem child, everyone was fed up with it.
Only two of the crew stayed behind to help.
Carburettors gone.
Even if we can get that fixed, the starter motor is gone.
We put it into gear, it goes into third, and then that just stalls the engine and then you're back to square one again.
The Bordo was just five miles away.
There you go.
This is an object lesson for the owners of old cars everywhere.
You can drive them round the world.
Yeah, it's really relaxing.
Come on.
Bordo!
1,596 kilometres.
That's near as damn it a thousand miles.
I've still got half a car left and very bad hair.
I don't believe that.
Sorry, I've got no brakes.
Yeah.
It's there.
We've done it.
All we had to do now was wait, wait to see which car Jeremy arrived in.
Is that an engine?
That's a car.
A mistakeable clatter of an air-cooled engine.
It's going to be the Beetle.
And it was.
But I wasn't driving it.
Yeah, I'm almost pleased.
Yes!
Oh, that's excellent.
Sorry, there's no brakes.
Congratulations.
That's astonishing.
I think, realistically, we have to say the Lancia's won it.
Why?
By what possible measure?
No, you... It's the most surprising.
It's the worst.
No, well, you don't buy a second-hand car to be surprised that it still works.
It had to be rebuilt once a day.
Yeah, but you're right, it's rubbish.
Mercedes is the best car.
What?
What have I had to do?
I've had to change... Take the entire body off.
It's a showroom model, James.
All right, I admit that it's not entirely original, but in mechanical terms, it was perfect.
You cannot break it.
I think, honestly, we have to be magnanimous here, because only one of the cars has actually made it unmodified.
So, that brings us on to a Top Gear top tip.
If, people of Surrey, you want to replace your BMW X5 with something that's brilliant off-road... Simple.
Simple, inexpensive... Easy to maintain, surprisingly comfortable.
Absolutely.
Then you've got to get yourself a Volkswagen Beetle.
What?
It's true.
No, he's right.
It's true.
He's right.
You've replaced all the electrics in that car.
Tomorrow night at 8.50, it's more from the Top Gear lads with a Bolivia special as Jeremy, James and Richard are driving all the way to the coast of Chile from the heart of the jungle.
Let's hope they bring enough glove compartment snacks.
And up next, it's Sherlock on three.
