Day two on the salt pans, and we'd been told that today our problem would not be mud, but dust.
That meant James and I had to rethink our wardrobe solutions.
I've teamed my koi with a bin liner.
V-necked.
The last time I wore one of these, I'd seen a clash.
Frankly, I thought it was all a bit much.
I mean, how bad could this dust be?
My eyes!
Crikey, I can't even see Jezza already.
Oh, no, no, no, no.
Meanwhile, in my unmodified cadet... I'm going to adjust my quarter light a bit.
Just an inch.
That's better.
I can feel the heat there.
It's nice.
The kakai's come off.
Hello?
James and I made it through the dust with our lives considerably shortened.
I've got consumption and TB.
I've got every single 1920s disease.
And then Lord Smug piped up.
I had to close this at one point, just about that much, and then it pulls the air out and you just get fresh air through, it's nice.
You know what it's like when someone punches you really hard in the middle of the face?
I do, actually.
Then the surface got even worse.
It was like we were descending through the seven circles of hell.
I'd assumed it'd be the salt that would kill the notoriously rust-prone Lancia, but it was the rough going.
Even though it had now smoothed out again, the beater was in a bad way.
I've gone.
I've gone.
Are you conking out?
I've got no power, no drive.
Do you remember what the man said, Jeremy?
Breakdown and you... What is it?
Have a nice time?
No, die.
Well, that's loose.
That's hot.
It is a good job they cantered this engine over by 20 degrees, because that means it's more inaccessible than it would otherwise have been.
Oh, my God, look at this.
I've got to say, it has been nice, the piece.
You know, not having him around.
I've checked the alternator, the spark plugs, the HT leads and the distributor cap.
Poked around with the starter solenoid.
There's been faults with all of them, but it still isn't going.
I'm not sure which I favour most here, certain death or that beetle.
Come off!
I honestly believe it's had it.
It's my car on the crab.
No, it's tracking Troentruve.
He's worried about tracking, and look at it.
We knew that Jeremy would eventually catch us up, but what would he be driving?
I can see something in the mirrors.
Please let it be a beetle.
I do hope it's a beetle.
Please, please let it be a Beetle.
Please let it be a Beetle.
I'm back!
Oh, Jeremy, well done.
I'm disappointed... Sorry, delighted.
You're not in a Beetle!
Not a Beetle.
A fully functioning Lancia Beetle Coupe.
I just wanted the Beetle to pounce on you when you were straying behind.
I'm gutted.
Shall we just sandwich him, James?
No!
With their convoy back on the road,
