We drove deeper and deeper into the bush.
Lancia!
Yeah!
What is that?
Looks like the sea.
Eventually, the road disappeared altogether.
People of Surrey, I hope you're watching this.
We are...
driving a Lancia Beta Coupe, well, just in the middle of the... whatever you call this.
The good news was we'd successfully reached our campsite for the night.
The bad news came in the shape of another challenge.
Stretching before you is the Mercati Caddy.
These are the biggest salt flats in the world.
They're almost completely lifeless and as wide as Portugal.
No car has ever driven across them.
If you run out of water, you will die.
If your car breaks down and you can't be rescued, you will die.
If you run out of food, you will die.
It's like driving on a creme brulee.
There's a primeval ooze covered with a thin layer of salty crust.
If you have thin tyres, you will break through that crust, get stuck and you will die.
So it advises to fit fat tyres and remove as much weight as possible before setting off.
Well, how hard can it be?
Don't say that!
In camp, the weight-shedding began.
Ready?
That doesn't work.
Thanks awfully.
Feel how much this seat weighs.
Right, you work.
Fuel filler, I'll need that, maybe.
I'm going to take the hubcaps off, really, because they protect the hubs.
Can I point something out?
What?
Hammond's walking around his car muttering about how he needs all of it.
I know exactly what he's doing.
He's formed an emotional attachment, hasn't he?
It would be like saying to him, could you cut bits off your wife?
What are you doing?
I'm just going to take the radiator grill off on the basis that it's just an ornament.
Can I help you?
Please do.
Do you want your windows there?
No, no, no, no, they're fine.
No, really, I've worked that out.
Glasses?
This is the old glass.
Very thin glass.
Very thin.
God, they come off easily.
James?
Yes?
Using nothing but a hammer?
Yes.
Here's your beer.
Thank you, mate.
Have we lost enough weight now?
You haven't lost an ounce.
I've lost the spare wheel and something else.
Now look at mine.
I'm going to need some guide ropes to stop it floating away like a big balloon.
So tomorrow we die then?
No, I think it's like all these things, it's exaggerated.
We'll be fine, honestly.
We're going to be fine.
We've done enough.
The next morning, on the edge of the salt pans, we thought we'd come under attack from a Bond villain, but it turned out to be the vice-president of Botswana.
That is a killer ride.
It's better than an official Rover 75 and a couple of policemen on motorbikes.
He was amazed to hear what was being planned.
I've just never known anybody to go across in a car.
This should be the first time, I think.
Oh, really?
Oh, really?
Yes.
That should be interesting.
You were smiling, you've just stopped.
Buoyed by the Vice President's optimism, we set off.
Nothing really prepares you for the sheer size of these.
I think, in a way, that is more frightening than the pole.
It's absolutely... You can see the curvature of the earth.
As we ploughed on, the little Opel was going well.
Oliver is just skipping.
Boom!
This car was born to do this.
Sadly, though, despite the weight-shedding, my Lancia was not doing so well.
Judging by the way the tyres are kind of turning,
