He's protecting the important bits.
Keen to get going, the three of us fired up our engines.
Well, when I say three.
It's absolutely dead.
Nothing is functioning.
There is no electrical... You two are not being helpful.
No.
What a stupid thing to say.
Interior light, headlight?
Nothing.
You don't know how to mend the ignition circuit on a 1981 Lancia Beetle?
No, it's... It was a long shot.
Annoyingly, a couple of the locals did know what to do.
And we drove to African Stig's rally stage, which was in a dried-up riverbed a few miles away.
With packed spectator stands, Oliver went first.
Three, two...
One.
Go!
Three miles an hour.
You know, when it was new, it had 40 horsepower.
If it's lost one a year, it's at minus four.
He's going round the first corner.
Hold on.
That was a power slide.
Look at that.
It does look... Ridiculous is the word you're looking for.
As the cadets struggle to get up the hill, the spectators left.
It is eminent.
Come on, joggle it, Stig's cousin.
He's enjoying that.
And one minute, 12 seconds.
I think that's a good benchmark for you to try and beat.
Next up was the Panzer Tank.
Most powerful, longest, best tyres... Longest?
Longest is good for rallying, is it?
It is on this, yeah.
So why doesn't... On loose surface rallies, don't they turn up with intercity trains?
That's the most ridiculous spectacle I've ever seen in my entire life, a Mercedes with no bonnet, no front wings, no doors.
In the hands of African Stig, though, it was flying.
That is the latest in a long line of pedigree lightened Mercedes-Benz sports cars.
There's never been a Mercedes rally car.
Oh, yours is flying up the hill, mate.
Look at it go.
You wait till you see the Lancia wheel dance through there.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, it's out of control.
That's a big slide!
One minute six.
I'll just do my ancient... I hate you gloating.
No, let him do it.
It's like winning a semi-final.
Time now to put James in his place because the Lancia was on home turf with its rally pedigree.
Stratos, 037.
What?
That's not dust, it's on fire!
Can I turn it off?
Look at it all!
Stopwatch still running.
45 seconds.
We'll replace the seal.
And then, when it's cooled down a bit, he'll be able to do the lap.
He'll have difficulty, though.
He's off.
And maybe he started.
Maybe... Start the stopwatch.
I think he was in a hurry, so he decided not to take your car.
Hey, Jeremy.
What?
You're right, though.
Your engine.
It's canted.
Once again, the broken lance here was fixed.
And then Jeremy arrived with some woe for all of us.
What?
Forget some of it.
That's it.
Those are the fuel cans.
The problem was that Richard's car and mine ran on leaded fuel, which was incredibly hard to find.
And it was no use turning to the film crew for help.
Diesel, diesel, diesel and two-stroke.
Diesel... Guys, it's diesel and two-stroke.
The town of Maun was about 60 miles away, and with little fuel, we'd have to go there as the crow flies.
Now we really would see how they'd cope off-road.
We've got to try and keep the distance down to save what fuel we've got.
All we're looking for is a track indicating that other people have passed this way and they would be heading to a town.
That's how broken my car is.
I was doing that in park.
These thorns are incredible.
Oh, look at that.
They've got like cocktail sticks growing out of them.
Take cover.
Once again, the 44-year-old Opel absolutely shone.
Come on, little fella.
Yeah!
With our precious fuel burning away, we carved out the straightest path possible.
