Using patience, I'd found a proper crossing point.
There is a technique to fording rivers, even on a proper ford like this.
You've got to keep enough speed up so you push a bow wave like that and you use whatever power you've got in the engine.
Come on, come on, come on.
Oh, my... No!
Oh, God!
He's stalled!
He's going down!
I can't open the door!
Oh, God!
Please!
Come out!
Come on!
Float!
Float!
Float!
Oliver!
Hammond, how's it going?
Well, I got a bit of water in him.
We did as well, but it doesn't matter because we used some rifles.
We shot the cars and the water's all drained out.
It's brilliant.
Good.
I might need the rifle.
As a local tourist truck pulled me out, the laughing hyenas arrived.
May gave his diagnosis.
Starting from the top, the battery's probably pretty knackered, and then the carburettor will be flooded, in a literal sense.
And then working down the distributor cap, that'll be full of water.
The engine itself, I mean, if a bit of water went into the cylinders, you might have compressed it and broken something.
The oil will be ruined.
I know all this.
I can fix him.
You are going to try and mend this?
If you'd leave me to it, yeah.
So we did.
Oh, that's harsh.
That is quite harsh, but go on.
Oh, I like this one.
It's sad, so sad.
It's a sad, sad situation.
Unfortunately, you can only give a man so much sympathy.
So James and I went ahead to make camp.
Hammond knew that in the morning, if his beloved Oliver wasn't fixed, he'd have to leave him behind.
So he got our bush mechanic to bring the generator down... ..and worked on through the night.
Morning came and still no Hammond.
What happened today?
I mean, I'm feeling quite like an explorer.
Is that Hammond?
Is it a beetle more to the point?
No way.
No way.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, he's back.
And here's the best thing.
Do you remember the horn, which was rubbish?
No, it's excellent.
Is that technically possible?
Probably not.
For 47 years, I've never been speechless.
With all the cars defying all the odds, we began our final push to the border.
My car is working perfectly, as usual.
I've got no brakes.
The pedal goes straight to the floor and I have to declutch to stop, so I just tread on my own foot.
So I'm using the handbrake.
Ha!
The Lancia could beat that.
Every time I brake, it spears off to the right and I'm unable to steer left to correct that.
This has now gone from being a nuisance to being downright dangerous.
We soon reached the end of the Okavango, so we pulled over to remove the animal protection.
And then, guess what?
The Lancia simply would not get going again.
It now won't start, because the starter's only chosen this moment to pack up, but when it was running, it wouldn't move off in any of the gears.
It was just that last 60k.
It had that feel of a car that was dying.
Richard actually sympathised, because he'd been there.
As for James... A vehicle.
I'm not going to give in.
I'll push it.
