Guys, you know what we're driving through?
Plants.
No, this is a weed.
It grows locally and it's hallucinogenic.
What did you say?
If any car was going to get stuck, we would have put money on the Lance here, but no.
All right, mate?
Sorry.
Horn doesn't work.
Clearly, I'd have to get myself out.
I'm going to make a rudimentary temporary road for my back wheel.
Thank God.
Eventually, we found a smoother track.
Whoa!
And I did a detailed analysis of the Lancia's conditioning.
Sit-rep.
It's all broken.
As darkness fell, we found the road to Mamm.
But by this stage, even Oliver was suffering.
I can't use my lights.
Alternator's packed up all full of dirt and dust.
If I put the lights on, I can have the lights, but not the engine, because it all dies.
So I've actually got Jonathan, who brings all the cameras and does all that for us, in here with me, lighting me when I talk to you with the torch, which he then uses to light the road ahead when I'm not talking to you.
Finally, we rolled into Man.
Which year was it made?
1981.
It's just driven all the way from Zimbabwe to here without going on a road.
Like this?
Yeah.
Get out of the way of the pub.
I shall move it for you.
If you ask politely, I will move it.
Yeah, that's his line.
They are grown-ups, honestly.
They do this a lot.
We were now just over halfway, and amazingly, our cars were still running.
All of them.
The next day, in the centre of Maun, we got our next challenge.
The Glittering Golden Envelope.
You will drive your cars to Namibia through the Okavango Delta.
That's the really big wildlife place.
In the Okavango, you will encounter many deadly animals, including lions, leopards, cheetahs, hyenas, wild dogs, hippos, black rhino and crocodile.
Bird snakes, shield-nosed snakes, puff adders, boomslang, cape cobras, banded cobras, black mambas, black widows and thick-tailed scorpions.
What about the honey badger?
The what?
That's the least scary-sounding animal in the world.
A honey badger does not kill you to eat you.
It tears off your testicles.
It does not!
Why is it called a honey badger?
Because that's why it's made it angry.
Why isn't it called the badger of death?
In order to protect ourselves from the lions and the honey badgers, Jeremy and I would have to rebuild our cars.
But because we'd left all the bits on the other side of the salt pans, we had to use whatever we could find.
Did a lion eat this?
Who do I see about the corrugated metal?
I suppose I've had a practice, at least, with my lion drill.
Oh, no, there's a lion coming.
Ah, what shall I do?
That.
Oliver will protect me.
Because I had nothing to do, I decided to irritate Jeremy.
I want to go to that tarpaulin, then.
Tarpaulin?
Tarpaulin will defeat... Oh, no, it's well known, tarpaulin, for its almost military protective capabilities.
That's why you often see people going into war zones draped in tarpaulin.
Could you put a new door on a car?
Come and have a look.
I'll show you what I mean.
It's not sophisticated metalwork, this, but...
I would like a tarpaulin roof for a Lancia Beta Coupe, 1981.
We can.
We can make anything here.
Do you have any lion-proof tarpaulin?
So it's got to be, like, this thick.
Yeah.
One and a half metres by, say, one and a half metres.
If you think of a lion door, it'd be about that big.
Could you ignore him and make me that?
Because Mercedes were very popular in Africa, James soon found a spare door and boot lid for his car.
And while he was looking for more bits, I hatched a plan.
Look what I've got.
That's a cow's head.
Yeah.
Now, this will attract flies, which will make his life unpleasant.
Yes.
It will also attract lions, tigers... He effectively becomes a burger van for driving.
And to make sure the lions didn't miss,
