Back up to strength, we pressed on, apart from Jeremy being Bill Oddie occasionally.
This is where flamingos breed out here.
So that's breeding, is it?
It's a fossil.
It's not a fossil.
It only died about two years ago.
I was talking about you.
It's an ex-flamingo.
Hey, no, look.
What now?
I know what created this.
Ostrich.
Yes!
Its legs are miles apart.
That's exactly how it was walking.
You know, David Attenborough's about to retire.
Can I just say... What?
You look like a gay cowboy and you look like a gay terrorist.
No, you look like a terrorist with a broken windscreen wiper and your face is ridiculous.
Ern Hammond started to pick on my car.
Why haven't you turned it on?
It's gathering electricity.
So if you turn it off, the battery's not going to start it again.
Turn it off and start it then.
Yeah, go on.
Turn it off and start it.
Let's have some beautiful silence.
Are you ready?
Yes.
Are you ready?
Yes.
Behold... Why did you turn it off, you idiot?
Because he said it would... Good luck, mate.
Somebody will give you a dub stop.
Don't go away.
Goodbye.
Annoyingly, Clarkson got the lancet going again.
And then we came across some big birds.
Wow!
And then we saw even more wildlife.
There's a cow.
Two cows, three cows.
Yes!
We've done it!
We had crossed the Mercati caddy.
Trees!
Life!
Mate, did you ever think that you'd do that?
I'm genuinely proud of him.
I am.
Really, I'm startled that this... that isn't a car anymore, whatever it is, has done it.
with its low-profile tyres and its low suspension that's broken.
Personally, I'm absolutely delighted because I think the Macaddy Caddy is one of the most unpleasant places I've ever been.
It's just a big bowl of dust.
Hello, mate.
Widow Twankey may have been glad to see the back of the salt pans, but despite this, they gave us a startling parting gift.
Wow, that is amazing.
That's the moon.
Yeah, that's the moon.
Because of the dust from the pans, you get... A moonrise in orange.
I've got goosebumps.
I know a Philip Larkin poem about the moon.
Would you like to hear it?
No.
As a new day dawned, our cars looked like wrecks.
But their ordeal was far from over.
Yes, we had crossed the salt pans, but we were still only a third of the way across Botswana.
And now we were about to enter the Kalahari.
Kalahari.
Everyone who comes to the Kalahari takes away a different memory of it.
Savagery, the simplicity, the vast heat.
Me, I think bumpiness.
It was as rough as hell, so we were glad when news came through that we were to stop at the next village.
Obviously, they recognise a truly classy car.
What could they possibly have in mind for us here?
It was another challenge.
Hello.
Here it is.
Your cars have travelled far and suffered much.
Yes, they have.
So we will now discover how much performance they've lost in a competition against the clock on a rally special stage.
Mine can't have lost any performance.
It never added any.
And I'm not going to ruin my Mercedes just for a few points.
You're right, you're not, because you're not driving it.
Well, who is?
Some say he's seen the Lion King 1,780 times, and that his second best friend is a Cape buffalo.
All we know is he's not the Stig, but he is the Stig's African cousin.
