Hello, hello, and welcome.
Thank you very much.
Now, as you know, the producers on this show like to give us challenges, specifically where they give us a very small amount of money and tell us to buy a used car.
Then they set unbelievably hard tasks to do to see which one of us got the best deal.
Yeah.
This week, for a Top Gear special, they came up with a real humdinger.
They gave each of us 1,500 quid and told us to go to Africa and buy a car.
Yeah, there were just two conditions.
It mustn't be four-wheel drive, and it mustn't be built in any way to go off-road.
The meeting point was the border post between Zimbabwe and Botswana.
And, for once, I was the first to arrive.
Now, as you'd expect, I've done this properly.
What I've got is a 1985 Mercedes-Benz 230e, a car that Africa absolutely adores, because it's comfortable, it's rugged, it's dependable, and frankly, if the other two have brought anything other than one of these along, they're idiots.
The first idiot arrived.
Can you open the door?
The handle's broken.
It is a Lancia Beta.
Coupé, 1981.
The only Lancia of any sort in the whole of Botswana.
It's done 29,000 miles.
One owner, is it?
It's the little old lady.
And boy, had she ragged it.
Yeah, that's normal, isn't it?
That fizzing?
That's... Yeah.
What's the piece of cardboard for?
Is that for mopping up moisture?
No, that's because the battery... Oh, it shorts on the bonnet?
Shorts on the bonnet a bit.
You've done well.
So, now what?
Do you want a lift?
We left the Lancia to cool down, because Hammond was arriving.
– What the hell is that?
– I don't know.
Could it be a Moskvitch?
– It's an Opel.
– Opel?
And on the front it says Cadet.
Yeah!
What the hell have you done, man?
It's an Opel Cadet from 1963.
So that's the same age as... That's the same age as Nick.
Yes, but it's much better Nick than you.
It was £1,200.
I had much change with which to buy many beans.
How much more simple can you get?
It's got two moving parts and it's been here for 44 years.
I love the speedo.
I do like a horizontal speedo.
I really do.
Where's the engine?
It's there.
Hang on.
It's tiny.
Do you want to know about the power?
Yes, I do.
Forty.
Forty horsepower.
Well, they did do a sport version with 48, but I didn't want anything too lairy.
You've both been idiots.
No.
Brilliantly interesting, brilliantly stylish, but stupid.
Why is mine stupid?
Where is yours?
Anansi, you have been a bit thick.
With the cars at the start line, it was time for our challenge.
The people of Surrey think they need four-wheel drive cars because they live up a lane which sometimes has leaves on it.
You will now attempt to prove them wrong by driving your two-wheel drive cars from here on Botswana's eastern border with Zimbabwe, which is there, 1,000 miles to its western border with Namibia.
That's right across the spine of Africa.
I'm confident.
I wasn't.
We hadn't even started, and the Lancia was playing up.
James chose not to wait.
He may be mechanically confident, but he has just turned right, which is simply a bomb wing, which is where I should point out the BBC is not allowed.
Sorry, sorry.
I'm going now.
The Lancia wheezed into life and Hammond and I set off in pursuit.
If you think of the cars that this inspired, it was Latin.
